---
layout: post
title: "Surviving the future"
date: 2019-03-14
excerpt: "Essay based on the documentary, Surviving the future"
tags: [Climate change, Essay]
comments: false
post-list: true
---


Apart from the wars and civil unrest, the 21<sup>st</sup> century has been marked by
extreme climatic events such as increased frequency and intensity of hurricanes
and forest fires. The increase in the atmospheric and oceanic temperatures has
accelerated the glacial ice loss affecting Greenland and Antartica, reaching an
observable and quantifiable level in the past decade. The increased oceanic
temperatures have led to changes in oceanic current patterns and have caused
unprecedented weather patterns in several parts of the world, inconsistent with
predictions from the long-term climatic models. Another observable event of
interest has been the migration of the biosphere to further northern colder
latitudes, owing to the conducive weather, due to the global environmental
change.

The predictability of these events accurately using the short-term climate
models, instead of the long term ones suggest the fact that these observable
events in the recent history have been triggered by events of the past century.
The gasses such as the oxides of the carbon, nitrogen, sulfur were found in
trace amounts in the pre-industrial atmosphere. The anthropogenic emissions,
owing to increased industrialization and the energy consumption has led to an
imbalance in the concentration of this trace gasses and ultimately led to the
breaking of pre-existing natural cycle. The new cycles, accounting for these
'additional' oxides of carbon, nitrogen, sulfur etc. , requires more residence
time in the atmosphere and the increased lifetime has wrecked havoc on the local
and global weather systems.

Besides creating a hostile environment for life, the changing local and global
weather systems have been a major economic concern, because of its adverse
effects on the human health and welfare of the biosphere for the last couple of
decades. Another unforeseen event was the decrease in the economic activities
associated with the agriculture and fishing. And this disastrous effect of the
changing climate on the developing nations occupying a geographical position of
+/- 30<sup>o</sup>C latitude, where 6/7<sup>th</sup> of the total global
population lives and the primary economic activities are related to agriculture,
animal husbandry and fishing.

However the main contributors to the anthropogenic emissions are the
industrialized nations, where less than 15% of the global population reside,
but has an average individual carbon footprint 500 times that of an individual
from a developing nation. In spite of this emission - economic - effect
disparities, the nations with the bulk of these emissions has chosen the
position of a 'climate skeptic' and at times that of a 'climate realist'. The
position of these nations is a result of an economic inertia - partially due to
the availability of the cheap fossil fuel resources and infrastructure and
partially due to the collusion of the politicians and corporations to advance
the vested interests of the latter. The sustenance of subsidies for fossil
fuels, established in an era when the dangers posed by the same to the
environment were unknown, which amounts to a few trillions of dollars while the
renewable resources have received a subsidy of a few billion dollars is a result
of this unholy nexus.

The common man is immune to the facts of climate change due to the lack of
awareness, the vastness of the spatial and temporal scales over which these
events occur. For example, the events of the early 1950's have caused the ozone
hole near Antartica - just inhabited by penguins, similarly, the current
increase in the temperature is attributed to the carbon emissions during the
same period. Thus the events need to be perceived on a global scale and time
scales of a couple of hundred years, to understand the severity of the Pandora's
box we have opened. An important step would be the education of the masses,
however, we don't have the time for the effects of this education to seep to the
policy making bodies, since the effect of emissions at status quo would lead to
an apocalyptic scenario on this planet. Thus the problem needs to be addressed
at all levels simultaneously, from the legislative bodies to the school levels.
Any opportunity presented by the fossil fuel related industries comes at a very
high price, the jobs created by fossil fuel and associated industries, come at
the price of human health in the immediate surroundings and  environmental
change in the global sense - thus these jobs are not a profitable deal. However
had the governments invested the enormous subsidies to renewable resources,
being a developing sector - more jobs would be created - from developing the
infrastructure to operation of the newly created resource. Thus, at this point
of time we are technologically capable of developing the renewable
infrastructure to cater to the needs - should we decide to do so.

In the past, we have shown our capacity to ignore the catastrophe's, an important
question raised at this point is how many disasters should happen before the
policy makers and the public awaken to the reality of climate change and opt for
reality-based choices. The current impasse at the climate science events, Paris
2015 - Copenhagen 2009 etc, reveals the political impossibility of consensus,
but the countries such as Sweden, Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Scotland, Germany etc.
has proved it to be a technological possibility. Thus reaching a political
consensus, on tighter environmental regulations and discouraged use of fossil
fuels is a matter of emergency to ensure an intergenerational justice, because
"We do not inherit the Earth from our ancestors, we borrow it from our
children."
